Be clear on Solana support (#1225)
hyperledger/solang: docs/targets/solana.rst

Solana
======

Solana Overview
_______________

> The Solana blockchain has a unique account model that resembles a key-value database.

Reviewer: What does this mean or what are you trying to say? I don't know how Solana resembles a key-value database.

Reviewer: Well that's one way of describing the database. How is that distinct from any other blockchain? Why does it matter?

Author: I have removed the first sentence.

As the underlying environment follows a programming model different than that of Ethereum, Solidity inner workings
have been modified to work properly on Solana.

A Solidity contract on Solana utilizes two accounts: a data account and a program account.
The program account stores the contract's executable binary and owns the data account,
which holds all the storage variables.

Contract upgrades
+++++++++++++++++

Provided that the data layout from a new contract is compatible with that of an old one, it is possible
to update the binary in the program account and retain the same data, rendering

> contract upgrades implemented in Solidity unnecessary.

Reviewer: This should say how to do those upgrades

Author: Added.

Reviewer: This is very terse, it just deploys a program to known key pair (which we suggest anyway). Maybe a link to https://docs.solana.com/cli/deploy-a-program#set-a-programs-upgrade-authority would help.

Author: > This is very terse, it just deploys a program to known key pair (which we suggest anyway). Maybe a link to https://docs.solana.com/cli/deploy-a-program#set-a-programs-upgrade-authority would help.

The link you added here points to "Set an upgrade authority", but there is a section about redeploying a program (https://docs.solana.com/cli/deploy-a-program#redeploy-a-program). Which one should I add?

Author: I added a link to `Redeploy a program`. Let me know if this is what you were looking for.

Data types
++++++++++

- An account address consists of a 32-bits key, which is represented by the ``address`` type. This data model differs from

>   Ethereum 20-bits addresses.

Reviewer: bytes not bits

Author: Fixed

- Solana's virtual machine registers are 64-bit wide, so 64-bit integers ``uint64`` and ``int64`` are preferable over
  ``uint256`` and `int256`. Likewise, the builtin functions for *address* ``.balance``, ``.transfer()`` and ``.send()``
  use 64-bit integers.
- An address literal has to be specified using the ``address"36VtvSbE6jVGGQytYWSaDPG7uZphaxEjpJHUUpuUbq4D"`` syntax.

Runtime
+++++++

- Each instruction on Solana has a fixed amount of compute units. This concept supersedes the idea of gas from

>   Ethereum, so gas related functions are not available on Solana.

Reviewer: On ethereum, each instruction has a fixed number of gas units. This does not explain the difference between gas and compute units

Author: I have rephrased the sentence.

Reviewer: It does not explain the fundamental difference between solana compute units and gas and why there are no gas or compute unit functions available. 

A developer with a solidity contract with gas functions is supposed to know how to re-write their contract without gas functions.

- There is no ``ecrecover()`` builtin function because Solana does not use the ECDSA algorithm, but there
  is a ``signatureVerify()`` function which can check ed25519 signatures. As a consequence, it is not possible to
  recover a signer from a signature.
- The Solana target requires `Solana <https://www.solana.com/>`_ v1.8.1.
- Function selectors are eight bytes wide and known as *discriminators*.
- Solana provides different builtins, e.g. ``tx.program_id`` and ``tx.accounts``.

> - Try-catch statements do not work on Solana. If any invocation fails, the runtime will halt the contract.

Reviewer: - invocation is not a term used by ethereum or solana and there it is ambiguous. 
- the execution is halted, not the contract (how is a contract halted)

Author: > * there it is ambiguous.

Which different meanings can you spot in the sentence?

Reviewer: invocation could be be transaction, instruction, internal function call, external function call for example

Author: All those meanings are correct for the sentence, aren't they?
If a transaction, instruction, internal function call or external function call fail, the execution will halt.

Reviewer: It's still very ambiguous. It's not clear at all what you mean.

Author: > * invocation is not a term used by ethereum or solana and there it is ambiguous.

CPI means "cross program invocation".

Author: > It's still very ambiguous. It's not clear at all what you mean.

It might be ambiguous, but you could pinpoint all the intended meanings, so it is not unclear.

Reviewer: You're being pedantic. It is not clear to users.

Author: I have changed `invocation` (which is a term used by Solana - recall CPI) to `external call or contract creation`, which are the constructions allowed in a try-catch statement.

Reviewer: The terminology which is used by Solana is CPI, not invocation.

when extra gas is offered in a transaction. Each EVM instruction has an associated gas value, which translates to real
ETH cost. Provided that one can afford all the gas expenses, there is no upper boundary for the amount of gas limit
one can provide in a transaction, so Solidity for Ethereum has gas builtins, like ``gasleft``, ``block.gaslimit``,
``tx.gasprice`` or the Yul ``gas()`` builtin, which returns the amount of gas left for execution.

On the other hand, Solana is optimized for low latency and high transaction throughput and has an equivalent concept to
gas: compute unit. Every smart contract function is allowed the same quantity of compute units (currently that
value is 200k), and every instruction of a contract consumes exactly one compute unit. There is no need to provide
an amount of compute units for a transaction and they are not charged, except when one wants priority execution on
chain, in which case one would pay per compute unit consumed. Therefore, functions for gas are not available on
Solidity for Solana.

Solidity for Solana incompatibilities with Solidity for Ethereum
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

> - There is no ``msg.sender``, as detailed :ref:`here <msg_sender_solana>`.

Reviewer: making the text of a link `here` or `this` is bad style but this PR is taking too long

Solana
======

Solana Overview
_______________

As the underlying Solana environment is different than that of Ethereum, Solidity inner workings
have been modified to function properly. A Solidity contract on Solana utilizes two accounts: a data account
and a program account. The program account stores the contract's executable binary and owns the data account,

> which holds all the storage variables.

Author: It should not be `For example` there, because it is not an example. The paragraph explain what those account are for.

> which holds all the storage variables.

Reviewer: In the `Solana Overview` you start talking about program accounts and data accounts for some reason. There are tons of differences, I don't know why this one has to be called out in the overview.

`For example,` I wanted to add should go earlier in the paragraph, before `A Solidity contract on Solana utilizes two accounts`

> which holds all the storage variables.

Author: Fixed

Contract upgrades
+++++++++++++++++

Provided that the data layout from a new contract is compatible with that of an old one, it is possible
to update the binary in the program account and retain the same data, rendering

> contract upgrades implemented in Solidity unnecessary. Solana's CLI tool provides a command to update a program:

Author: Fixed

.. code-block:: bash

    solana program deploy --program-id <KEYPAIR_FILEPATH> <PROGRAM_FILEPATH>

where ``<KEYPAIR_FILEPATH>`` is the program's keypair json file and ``<PROGRAM_FILEPATH>``
is the program binary ``.so`` file. For more information about redeploying a program,
check `Solana's documentation <https://docs.solana.com/cli/deploy-a-program#redeploy-a-program>`_.

Data types
++++++++++

- An account address consists of a 32-bytes key, which is represented by the ``address`` type. This data model
  differs from Ethereum 20-bytes addresses.
- Solana's virtual machine registers are 64-bit wide, so 64-bit integers ``uint64`` and ``int64`` are preferable over
  ``uint256`` and ``int256``. Likewise, the builtin functions for *address* ``.balance``, ``.transfer()`` and ``.send()``

>   use 64-bit integers.

Author: Fixed

> - An address literal has to be specified using the ``address"36VtvSbE6jVGGQytYWSaDPG7uZphaxEjpJHUUpuUbq4D"`` syntax.

Author: Fixed

Runtime
+++++++

- The Solana target requires `Solana <https://www.solana.com/>`_ v1.8.1.
- Function selectors are eight bytes wide and known as *discriminators*.
- Solana provides different builtins, e.g. ``tx.program_id`` and ``tx.accounts``.

Compute budget
++++++++++++++

On Ethereum, when calling a smart contract function, one needs to specify the amount of gas the operation is allowed
to use. Gas can be used as a way for giving a contract priority execution on chain, provided that the gas available

> for execution is high enough. Solidity for Ethereum has gas builtins, like ``gasleft`` or the Yul ``gas()`` builtin,

Author: The execution priority part is not wrong. If you offer more gas, your tip for the validator will be higher, so your priority for execution.

> for execution is high enough. Solidity for Ethereum has gas builtins, like ``gasleft`` or the Yul ``gas()`` builtin,

Author: I am confused myself. The way I understand the following is also true for Solana. `So, you pay as much as all the instructions in the transaction uses, and there`. On Ethereum, the user specify the gas limit, on Solana the limit is fixed. I still don't get it why Solana does not have a function like `compute_units_left`. The best explanation I could find was the priority.
I could find the reason why one needs the gas functions on Ethereum, besides the prioritization.

> for execution is high enough. Solidity for Ethereum has gas builtins, like ``gasleft`` or the Yul ``gas()`` builtin,

Reviewer: > I am confused myself. The way I understand the following is also true for Solana. So, you pay as much as all the instructions in the transaction uses, and there.

That's not how I understand it. Fee calculation is based on number of signatures. I might be mistaken, where did you get  this from?

> for execution is high enough. Solidity for Ethereum has gas builtins, like ``gasleft`` or the Yul ``gas()`` builtin,

Reviewer: Do you have anything more than a proposal?

> for execution is high enough. Solidity for Ethereum has gas builtins, like ``gasleft`` or the Yul ``gas()`` builtin,

Author: It is an accepted proposal, so it is going to be implemented someday (ok, not a reliable source). I found this though:
https://docs.solana.com/transaction_fees#calculating-transaction-fees

> Transactions fees are calculated based on two main parts:
> 1. a statically set base fee per signature, and
> 2. the computational resources used during the transaction, measured in "[compute units].  (https://docs.solana.com/terminology#compute-units)"

> for execution is high enough. Solidity for Ethereum has gas builtins, like ``gasleft`` or the Yul ``gas()`` builtin,

Author: I have rewritten this section. Let me know if it sounds better now.

which returns the amount of gas left for execution.

> On the other hand, Solana utilizes the concept of compute budget. Every smart contract function is allowed the same

Author: Fixed

data account and a program account. The program account stores the contract's executable binary and owns
the data account, which holds all the storage variables. On Ethereum a single account can store executable
code and data.

Contract upgrades
+++++++++++++++++

Provided that the data layout from a new contract is compatible with that of an old one, it is possible
to update the binary in the program account and retain the same data, rendering
contract upgrades implemented in Solidity unnecessary. Solana's CLI tool provides a command to both do
an initial deploy of a program, and redeploy it later.:

.. code-block:: bash

    solana program deploy --program-id <KEYPAIR_FILEPATH> <PROGRAM_FILEPATH>

where ``<KEYPAIR_FILEPATH>`` is the program's keypair json file and ``<PROGRAM_FILEPATH>``
is the program binary ``.so`` file. For more information about redeploying a program,
check `Solana's documentation <https://docs.solana.com/cli/deploy-a-program#redeploy-a-program>`_.

Data types
++++++++++

- An account address consists of a 32-bytes key, which is represented by the ``address`` type. This data model
  differs from Ethereum 20-bytes addresses.

> - Solana's virtual machine registers are 64-bit wide, so 64-bit integers ``uint64`` and ``int64`` are preferable over

Reviewer: That could definitely use more words. This is not obvious to a solidity developer.

In addition this should mention that multiply, divide and modulo are a lot more expensive.

> - Solana's virtual machine registers are 64-bit wide, so 64-bit integers ``uint64`` and ``int64`` are preferable over

Reviewer 2: `Solana's virtual machine registers are 64-bit wide` is the _reason_ on why they are preferable, not the explanation

> - Solana's virtual machine registers are 64-bit wide, so 64-bit integers ``uint64`` and ``int64`` are preferable over

Author: Fixed

> - Solana's virtual machine registers are 64-bit wide, so 64-bit integers ``uint64`` and ``int64`` are preferable over

Reviewer 2: Very nice!

  ``uint256`` and ``int256``. Likewise, all balances and values on Solana are 64-bit wide, so the builtin functions for
  *address* ``.balance``, ``.transfer()`` and ``.send()`` use 64-bit integers.
- An address literal has to be specified using the ``address"36VtvSbE6jVGGQytYWSaDPG7uZphaxEjpJHUUpuUbq4D"`` syntax.
- Ethereum syntax for addresses ``0xE0f5206BBD039e7b0592d8918820024e2a7437b9`` is not supported.

Runtime
+++++++

- The Solana target requires `Solana <https://www.solana.com/>`_ v1.8.1.
- Function selectors are eight bytes wide and known as *discriminators*.
- Solana provides different builtins, e.g. ``tx.program_id`` and ``tx.accounts``.

Compute budget
++++++++++++++

On Ethereum, when calling a smart contract function, one needs to specify the amount of gas the operation is allowed
to use. Gas serves to pay for a contract execution on chain and can be a way for giving a contract priority execution
when extra gas is offered in a transaction. Each EVM instruction has an associated gas value, which translates to real

> ETH cost. As there is no limit gas for the amount of gas one can provide in a transaction,

Reviewer: > As there is no limit gas for the amount of gas one can provide in a transaction,

Ethereum has a gas limit field in a transaction for exactly this

Author: What does this mean?

Author: There is no limit for what you can input int the `gas limit` field.

Author: Can you elaborate more on what you are trying to point here?

Reviewer: > As there is no limit gas for the amount of gas one can provide in a transaction,

This is not clear. This could be read as: 
- it is not possible to limit the amount of gas that a transaction can use.
- you can specify any value you want as a gas limit (you're limited by your balance after all)

Also: do you mean `no gas limit`?

Author: > Also: do you mean `no gas limit`?

`limit gas` was your suggested wording.

`there is no limit gas except for the amount of eth provided in the transaction for gas. `

Author: Fixed.

Solidity for Ethereum has gas builtins, like ``gasleft`` or the Yul ``gas()`` builtin,
which returns the amount of gas left for execution.

On the other hand, Solana is optimized for low latency and high transaction throughput. Every smart contract function

> is allowed the same quantity of compute units (currently that value is 200 thousand), and every instruction of a

Reviewer: This should make clear that compute units are the solana equivalent to gas. It is implied here but not said explicitly, which makes it harder to read

contract consumes exactly one compute unit. There is no need to provide an amount of compute units for a transaction
and they are not charged, except when one wants priority execution on chain, in which case one would pay per
compute unit consumed. Therefore, functions for gas are not available on Solidity for Solana.

Solidity for Solana incompatibilities with Solidity for Ethereum
++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++++

- There is no ``msg.sender``, as detailed :ref:`here <msg_sender_solana>`.
- There is no ``ecrecover()`` builtin function because Solana does not use the ECDSA algorithm, but there
  is a ``signatureVerify()`` function, which can check ed25519 signatures. As a consequence, it is not possible to
  recover a signer from a signature.
- Try-catch statements do not work on Solana. If any external call or contract creation fails, the runtime will

>   halt execution.

Reviewer: Good point, it should say that the entire transaction is reverted/aborted

  *address* ``.balance``, ``.transfer()`` and ``.send()`` use 64-bit integers.
- An address literal has to be specified using the ``address"36VtvSbE6jVGGQytYWSaDPG7uZphaxEjpJHUUpuUbq4D"`` syntax.
- Ethereum syntax for addresses ``0xE0f5206BBD039e7b0592d8918820024e2a7437b9`` is not supported.

Runtime
+++++++

- The Solana target requires `Solana <https://www.solana.com/>`_ v1.8.1.
- Function selectors are eight bytes wide and known as *discriminators*.
- Solana provides different builtins, e.g. ``tx.program_id`` and ``tx.accounts``.

Compute budget
++++++++++++++

On Ethereum, when calling a smart contract function, one needs to specify the amount of gas the operation is allowed
to use. Gas serves to pay for a contract execution on chain and can be a way for giving a contract priority execution
when extra gas is offered in a transaction. Each EVM instruction has an associated gas value, which translates to real
ETH cost. As there is no limit gas for the amount of gas one can provide in a transaction,
Solidity for Ethereum has gas builtins, like ``gasleft`` or the Yul ``gas()`` builtin,

> which returns the amount of gas left for execution.

Reviewer: also: `block.gaslimit`, `tx.gasprice`

Author: These are nice to add.

These builtins were missing since I opened the PR. It takes time to go from one version to another, so please make your reviews as complete as possible.

the data account, which holds all the storage variables. On Ethereum a single account can store executable
code and data.

Contract upgrades
+++++++++++++++++

Provided that the data layout from a new contract is compatible with that of an old one, it is possible
to update the binary in the program account and retain the same data, rendering
contract upgrades implemented in Solidity unnecessary. Solana's CLI tool provides a command to both do
an initial deploy of a program, and redeploy it later.:

.. code-block:: bash

    solana program deploy --program-id <KEYPAIR_FILEPATH> <PROGRAM_FILEPATH>

where ``<KEYPAIR_FILEPATH>`` is the program's keypair json file and ``<PROGRAM_FILEPATH>``
is the program binary ``.so`` file. For more information about redeploying a program,
check `Solana's documentation <https://docs.solana.com/cli/deploy-a-program#redeploy-a-program>`_.

Data types
++++++++++

- An account address consists of a 32-bytes key, which is represented by the ``address`` type. This data model
  differs from Ethereum 20-bytes addresses.
- Solana's virtual machine registers are 64-bit wide, so 64-bit integers ``uint64`` and ``int64`` are preferable over

>   ``uint256`` and ``int256``. An operation with types wider than 64-bits is split into multiple operations, making
>   it slower and consuming more compute units. This is the case, for instance, with multiplication, division and modulo
>   using `uint256`.

Reviewer: This makes it appear as though only mul/div/mod cost more and other operations do not. It's just not clear at all.

```suggestion
  ``uint256``, ``int256``, ``uint128``, or ``int128``. An operation with types wider than 64-bits is split into multiple instructions, making
  it slower and consuming more compute units. Multiplication, division and modulo will require even more instructions,
  depending what values are involved. In addition, 256 bit values require more storage, either in account data, on the
  stack, or on the heap.
```
```

contracts on chain. Examples are available on Solang's integration tests.
See `system_instruction_example.sol <https://github.com/hyperledger/solang/blob/main/integration/solana/system_instruction_example.sol>`_
and `system_instruction.spec.ts <https://github.com/hyperledger/solang/blob/main/integration/solana/system_instruction.spec.ts>`_

Known Issues
____________

1. `Issue #698 <https://github.com/hyperledger/solang/issues/698>`_: Custom errors are not yet supported.
2. `Issue #887 <https://github.com/hyperledger/solang/issues/877>`_: Solidity *mapping* may consume all the storage capacity due to a bug that keeps inserting new entries, even if we
   are only checking if a key exists.
3. `Issue #932 <https://github.com/hyperledger/solang/issues/932>`_: Multidimensional dynamic arrays are not properly implemented and Solang might fail during compilation.

> 4. `Issue #1192 <https://github.com/hyperledger/solang/issues/1192>`_: The data account layout is not yet specified in the Anchor IDL.

Reviewer: Remove this, people can find the issues on github themselves, and also we don't want to maintain this list - it will get out of date as we resolve issues.

Author: I agree people can find this on Github, but they won't read all the open issues we have. I just wanted to highlight things that should be avoided by now.

Reviewer: We don't want to put people off.

Author: > We don't want to put people off.

This won't put people off, but making them spending time trying out things we know won't work might disappoint them.

Author: This was requested in #786

Author: Removed

Reviewer: I've looked at again at #786 and I think what the ask is a list of things that currently don't work with solang. That is not the same as a list of known issues in github.
What is much more important is a list of things which currently just don't work, for example:
 - `msg.sender` does not work
 - value transfer with function call does not work
 - many yul builtins/opcodes don't work
 - external calls need more information (accounts)
 - erc20 
 - solidity try/catch 
 - solidity error definitions/revert with error definition
 
That's all I can think of right now. 

It might be reasonable to include a link to any issues in github with the label `solana`

Author: All those points are important information to add.

I still have the impression, thought, that #786 wants things that are not working (issues):
`Known issues / things which are not working currently (i.e. which solidity syntax/features/functions/apis do not currently work)`

Author: Updated
